
3.Animal organisation - transport systems

    The circulatory system
        In single-celled organisms such as protists, and small multicellular organisms, essential molecules will move to where they're needed by diffusion.

        Once organism gets beyond a certain size, it needs a transport system to distribute essential molecules efficiently.

        Features of transport systems
            Common features of transport systems:
            they are made up of tubes or 'vessels' that carry materials from one part of the organism to another
            they make close contact with cells, such as those of exchange surfaces

        What substances are transported in the blood?
        Substance transported	From	                 To
        Oxygen	                The lungs	             All the body's cells
        Carbon dioxide	        All the body's cells	 Lungs
        Glucose	                Digestive system	     The liver, then all the body's cells
        Urea	                Liver cells	             Kidneys

        Other substances transported in the blood include:
        antibodies
        hormones

        Oxygen is carried in red blood cells. Dissolved substances are carried in the plasma.

    The heart
        Blood is pumped around the body by the heart.
        The heart has four chambers - two atria(Upper chambers of the heart which receive blood from veins) and two ventricles (The lower chamber of the heart that receives blood from the atrium and pumps it into arteries.).

        Blood enters the heart through the atria. Blood from two vena cavae enters the right atrium. 
        Blood from the pulmonary veins enters the left atrium.The atria fill, followed by the ventricles. 
        Blood is prevented from flowing back into the atria by heart valves.

        Blood leaves the heart in the body's main artery - the aorta(carries oxygenated blood from the heart in mammals) - from the left side,
        and the pulmonary artery(The artery which carries deoxygenated blood from the heart to the lungs.), from the right

        Double circulation
        Humans have a double circulatory system. The heart pumps blood through two circuits:

        the pulmonary circulation (The part of the circulatory system that involves the right side of the heart, the lungs, and the blood vessels that connect them together.)
        the systemic circulation (The part of the circulatory system that includes the left side of the heart, the rest of the body apart from the lungs, and the blood vessels that connect them together.)

        The systemic circulation is under high pressure - it has to deliver blood to the extremities of the body.

        The pulmonary circulation is under lower pressure, because: blood is delivered to the lungs only, which are very close to the heart
    
    Circulation
        One-way flow
        Blood must flow one way only through the circulatory system. Valves in the heart, aorta and veins ensure this one-way flow.

        Faulty heart valves
        Heart valves may become faulty. A valve may not:

        open as wide as it should, restricting blood flow through the heart - this means less blood reaches the body, pressure builds up and the lungs can swell with fluid
        close properly and allow blood to leak back through into the atrium
        A patient will not always have symptoms. A scan of the heart can diagnose the problem. When symptoms are present, these are shortness of breath, dizziness, rapid heart rate and chest pain. The problem can lead to heart failure.

        Faulty heart valves can be replaced:

        with a biological valve from a human donor or made from animal tissue from a pig or cow
        with a mechanical valve made from strong, durable materials
        The operation is usually successful. Mechanical valves last longer, but blood can clot on them. A patient may need long-term medication that prevents blood clots developing. Biological valves are more likely to wear out.

    Control of the heart rate
        Specialised cells in the right atrium generate electrical signals that make the heart contract independently of the nervous system. These specialised cells act as a natural pacemaker.

        Artificial pacemakers
        Sometimes, the rhythm of the heart's natural pacemaker process becomes disrupted - a person's heart beats abnormally. It can be abnormally slow or fast, or irregular.

        An artificial pacemaker is a small, battery-operated electronic device implanted in a person's chest that sends out regular, adjustable electrical impulses to produce normal contractions of the heart.

    The blood vessels
        Blood is transported in arteries, veins and capillaries.

        Blood is pumped from the heart in the arteries. It is returned to the heart in the veins. 
        The capillaries connect the two types of blood vessel and molecules are exchanged between the blood and the cells across their walls.

        Arteries
        Always carry blood away from the heart
        Carry oxygenated blood, except for the pulmonary artery	
        Carry blood under high pressure	
        Have thick muscular and elastic walls to pump and accommodate blood	Have thin walls
        A type of supporting tissue called connective tissue provides strength
        The channel in the blood vessel that carries blood - the lumen - is narrow

        Veins
        Always carry blood to the heart
        Always carry deoxygenated blood, except for the pulmonary vein
        Carry blood under low or negative pressure
        have less muscular tissue than arteries
        Have less connective tissue than arteries
        Have a wide lumen

        Capillaries
        Capillaries connect the smallest branches of arteries and veins. The walls of capillaries are just one cell thick. Capillaries therefore allow the exchange of molecules between the blood and the body's cells

        Exchange of molecules

        Oxygen diffuses through the capillary wall, into the tissue fluid, and the cells.
        Carbon dioxide diffuses from the cells into the tissue fluid, then across the capillary walls into the blood plasma.
        Glucose diffuses from the blood plasma, across the capillary walls to the tissue fluid, and then to the cells.
        The waste product urea diffuses from the cells of the liver, to the tissue fluid, and then across the capillary walls into the blood plasma.


    Blood
        Blood transports materials and distributes heat around the body. It also helps to protect against disease.
        55% is plasma, which is a liquid that cells and cell fragments are suspended in:

        Remaining 45% are:
        Types of blood cell and cell fragments:
        red blood cells
        white blood cells
        platelets

        Component	        Function(s)
        Plasma	            Transporting carbon dioxide, digested food molecules, urea and hormones; distributing heat
        Red blood cells	    Transporting oxygen
        White blood cells	Ingesting pathogens and producing antibodies
        Platelets	        Involved in blood clotting

    Red blood cells
        Red blood cells transport the oxygen required for aerobic respiration in body cells. it contain the protein haemoglobin, which gives them their red colour.

        haemoglobin + oxygen at lungs produce oxyhaemoglobin
        oxyhaemoglobin breaks down into haemoglobin + oxygen at the cell

        Haemoglobin can combine reversibly with oxygen. This is important - it means that it can combine with oxygen as blood passes through the lungs, and release the oxygen when it reaches the cells.

        Red Blood Cells
        They have no nucleus- they lose it during their development - so they can pack in more haemoglobin.
        They are small and flexible so that they can fit through narrow blood capillaries.
        They have a biconcave shape - they are the shape of a disc that is curved inwards on both sides - to maximise their surface area for oxygen absorptio n.
        They are thin, so there is only a short distance for the oxygen to diffuse to reach the centre of the cell.

    White blood cells
        There are several main types of white blood cell.

        Phagocytes
            About 70 per cent of white blood cells are phagocytes. Phagocytes engulf and destroy unwanted microorganisms that enter the blood, by the process of phagocytosis. They are part of the body's immune system.

        Lymphocytes
            LymphocytesLymphocytes make up about 25 per cent of white blood cells. They are also part of the body's immune system. Lymphocytes produce soluble proteins called antibodies when a foreign body such as a microorganism enters the body.

    Platelets
        Platelets are cell fragments produced by giant cells in the bone marrow.

        Platelets stop bleeding in two main ways:
            they have proteins on their surface that enable them to stick to breaks in a blood vessel and clump together
            they secrete proteins that result in a series of chemical reactions that make blood clot, which plugs a wound.
            
    Blood products
        Blood products are components of blood that are given to a patient by transfusion (by drip). They include:
            red blood cells
            platelets
            plasma
            antibodies
        Blood for transfusion must be compatible with that of the patient's blood, for instance, their blood group. Before a transfusion, white blood cells are often removed to reduce the risk of infections or immune reactions.

        An example of a commonly-used stain is Giemsa stain. It aids identification by staining:

        red blood cells pink
        platelets pale pink
        white blood cell cytoplasm pale blue
        white blood cell nuclei magenta

    Development of cardiovascular disease
        Coronary heart disease
        The coronary arteries supply blood, and therefore oxygen, to the heart muscle. The coronary arteries may become blocked by a build-up of fatty material, caused by certain kinds of 'bad' cholesterol. As the fatty material increases, one or more coronary arteries narrow, and can become blocked. If a blockage builds up, the amount of oxygen reaching the heart muscle is reduced. A person will develop chest pain, and if left untreated, a heart attack is the result. 

        Ways of treating cardiovascular disease
        Coronary heart disease
            Statins : Statins are drugs that help to lower cholesterol in the blood. They do this by lowering its production in the liver. Statins need to be taken long-term. Cholesterol levels will rise again if a person stops taking them.
            they should not be prescribed for people with liver disease, or pregnant or breast feeding women.
        Stents : Coronary arteries that are blocked or have become narrow can be stretched open and a stent inserted to restore and maintain blood flow.
        They can be used in instances where drugs are less effective, and offer a longer term solution. Stents are made from metal alloys and do not lead to an immune response in the patient.

        Heart transplants
            A heart transplant is required in cases of heart failure. 
            Coronary heart disease can lead to heart failure. 
            The heart fails to pump sufficient blood and organs are starved of oxygen. 
            There are different degrees of severity of heart failure.

            Artificial hearts are plastic devices used occasionally to keep patients alive whilst waiting for a heart transplant. 
            They can also be used to allow a patient's heart to rest to help it recover.

            After the transplant, the patient will:
                need time to heal, recover and build up strength 
                have to take drugs called immunosuppressant drugs for the rest of their life - this prevents the person's immune system from rejecting the donor heart
                have an increased risk of infection because of these drugs

        Evaluation of different treatment methods
            Drugs - statins : 
                Advantage : Reduce the risk of heart attack. Studies have shown a decrease in 'bad cholesterol' and an increase on 'good cholesterol.' Used to reduce high cholesterol levels that have genetic causes. May have beneficial effects on other conditions.
                Disadvantage : Not suitable for people with liver disease. Some side effects. Must be taken for life. Should not be taken if pregnant or breastfeeding.

            Heart transplant
                Advantage: Improve quality of life.
                Disadvantage: Few donor hearts are available. Recovery time is long. There is a risk of rejection by the body's immune system.

            Replacement heart valves
                Advantage: Restore blood flow through the heart.
                Disadvantage: Biological valves may wear out. Blood clots may stick to mechanical valves - anti-blood clotting drugs need to be taken.
            Stents
                Advantage: Widen coronary arteries that have not responded to drug treatment. The recovery time is short following insertion of the stent.
                Disadvantage: In a minority of cases, further treatment is required.

    Taking pulses and calculating blood flows
        The simplest way of checking heart rate is to measure your pulse. As the heart beats, a pulse can be felt in locations where an artery passes over a solid structure, such as bone. Locations include wrist, neck and upper arm.

        In healthy people, generally, the lower the resting pulse rate, the fitter they are.

        Cardiac output in cm3 per minute = heart rate in beats per minute × stroke volume in cm3 per beat.

